FREYA-1376: Initiate ADRs for Pathogens Portal 2.0 (#1247)
ScilifelabDataCentre/pathogens-portal: doc/architecture/decisions/0002-pathogens-portal-2-0-architecture.md

# 2. Pathogens Portal 2.0 Architecture

## Status

Draft.

## Context

The Swedish Pathogens Portal is Sweden's national Pathogens Portal Node. The aim of this portal is to ensure that research outputs related to are shared in as Open and FAIR a manner as possible. In particular, the portal focuses on research outputs related to infectious disease and pandemic preparedness generated by research affiliated with a Swedish research organisation. 

### Core Components

**Portal website:**

> - The static site generator we currently use, Hugo, is augmented with JavaScript code to add dynamic capabilities. Everything is encapsulated into a single delivery unit.

Reviewer: What does 'encapsulated into a single delivery unit' mean?

Author: I think "encapsulated into a single delivery unit" means that both the static content generated by Hugo and the additional JavaScript code for dynamic functionality are packaged together as one cohesive deployable artefact.

**Supporting Services:**
- **Blobserver:** Stores and serves raw and processed data.
- **Form Manager:** Handles user-submitted forms.
- **DC-Dynamic:** Orchestrates scheduled job execution.
- **Pathogens Portal Visualisations:** Python scripts that process data and generate visualisations that are typically displayed on dashboards.

### Component Interactions & Information Flow

![Information flow in current Pathogens Portal](../../figures/0002-CurrentInfoFlow.png)
*Figure 1: Service-level information flow*

### Workflows to Update Content

> - **Static content:** Manual edits in the codebase by Team Freya followed by new deployment.

Reviewer: It might be good to highlight that this also includes manually editing data files (and then doing a new deployment) to add news, jobs etc.

- **Dynamic user data:** Users upload raw data to Blobserver. Team Freya configures automated scripts and cron jobs to transform and visualise the data in the static pathogen portal.
- **Dynamic team data:** Team Freya updates json files in Blobserver (related to events and funding opportunities, for example) which are analysed and injected directly into Hugo via the embedded JavaScript code to make the content appear dynamic. 

![Updating data workflow in current Pathogens Portal](../../figures/0002-CurrentActivityDiagram.png)

*Figure 2: User interaction workflows for updating content/data*

> ### Motivation for Pathogens Portal 2.0

Reviewer: I thought a big motivation was that we wanted RBAC/authentication for the raw data (currently uploaded to Blob Server) so the options to achieve that are either to add features to Blob Server or to look the service can run without Blob Server.

Reviewer 2: The main motivation for Pathogens portal is to be able to do dynamic/backend stuff in a proper way rather than having hacky implementations.

The external researchers data (from blobserver) will be moved to the Pathogens storage and it will have RBAC/authentication.

Pathogens storage will not be created just for hosting these data, We envision it to be a Pathogens data hub i.e. researcher can store any type of data (genomics, proteomoics, survey, readings, etc) related to pathogens.

Reviewer: I think this needs to be mentioned somewhere - as in, we have the need for RBAC for the data and your plan is that the 'portal' not have any RBAC but have that on this other application it will be connected to ('Portal Storage'). For me, this point of where the authentication will be implemented is one of the key architectural questions of this

Author: RBAC and authentication are essential, but they’ll be implemented in the independent **Pathogens Storage System**, not Portal 2.0. **Pathogens Storage System** will manage its user base and enforce access control with RBAC. Portal 2.0 won’t have user login or RBAC as it will serve only public data; and it’ll just consume data from **Pathogens Storage System** and other services via APIs.

In summary, RBAC and authentication are out of scope for Portal 2.0 and are delegated to **Pathogens Storage System**. Portal 2.0 acts as a secure, read-only consumer of data, with all access control enforced by the data-providing services such as **Portal Storage System**. Therefore RBAC will be cover in the ADR of **Pathogens Storage System** and considered as out-of-scope of Portal 2.0(?)

Reviewer: Deciding that the auth definitely belongs in the Storage rather than in Portal 2.0 is one of the most important architectural decisions of this work so I definitely think that the logic/rationale of that decision has to be laid out somewhere (rather than taken as a prerequisite). 

That said, no objection to saying that auth will be dealt with in a subsequent ADR though, given that the proposed backend (Django) here still allows the option of it going here.

Reviewer 3: Pathogens Portal 2.0 will only serve public data from different sources such as the upcoming Pathogens Storage System and other external data repositories via APIs, so user authentication and RBAC are not in the scope of Pathogens Portal 2.0 website.
However, they will be implemented in the upcoming Pathogens Storage System service, which will be discussed in a future ADR.

Reviewer 3: (just a shorter, summarised and to the point version of what you wrote) :)

Reviewer: Haha, now I'm getting sucked into the details of it (which is probably not the best approach if it's going to be dealt with in a future ADR) but: 

If we build a separate 'Pathogens Storage System' and put the RBAC there, that is definitely more effort - both up front and over time. My guess is we would need (at least) a separate web application and relational DB; both of which would already be present in the portal, as planned here. 

Having authentication in the portal doesn't mean that the same things that are public now wouldn't be public or that other data sources that don't require authentication couldn't be added subsequently, but you would have to build fewer things and could connect via boto3 to S3 storage, without the need for a separate web application, relational database etc. 

Now, it's not that I'm saying building those extra things is not the best choice/what we should do, but that there has to be a reason why it's worth the cost, e.g. are there concrete plans to use the Pathogens Storage System for anything but Pathogens? 
I know you referenced that this is the way some EBI systems work but do we know that they would architect their systems the same way if they could start again?

Reviewer 2: > Deciding that the auth definitely belongs in the Storage rather than in Portal 2.0 is one of the most important architectural decisions of this work so I definitely think that the logic/rationale of that decision has to be laid out somewhere (rather than taken as a prerequisite).

Since the current Pathogens Portal also does not have auth, and the new Pathogens Portal 2.0 will also be "all open to public" content, we never considered to have any kind of auth to the portal, thus we considered it out of scope (from Pathogens Portal's perspective)

> That said, no objection to saying that auth will be dealt with in a subsequent ADR though, given that the proposed backend (Django) here still allows the option of it going here.

Exactly, while developing if something changed and if wanted to have some kinda auth/rbac within Pathogens portal, we will create new ADR specific to that. Like you pointed out, proposed architecture/tool will give us the option :)

Reviewer 2: > Now, it's not that I'm saying building those extra things is not the best choice/what we should do, but that there has to be a reason why it's worth the cost, e.g. are there concrete plans to use the Pathogens Storage System for anything but Pathogens?

Exactly, as I mentioned earlier, we are not planning to develop 'Pathogens storage system' (this name is also arbitrary, will change) just for the sake of Pathogens portal, that would indeed not be optimal. But we envision it to be a Sweden's pathogen data hub, so researchers who work on pathogens can store(and share) their data.

> I know you referenced that this is the way some EBI systems work but do we know that they would architect their systems the same way if they could start again?

I would believe so, if their objective/purpose/meaning for a "portal" and "data hub" is still the same.

Reviewer 2: That all being said, the current ADR primarily focus on shifting the technology of current portal without much modification in its functionality. Later on we will think about new functionalities as it needed, so even if changed our minds about "pathogens storage solution". With the proposed architecture/tools, we can still add new functionalities like storage, auth, etc. (there will be new ADRS for that of course).

Reviewer 4: Excellent catch @aishling-scilifelab  

The placement of authentication/authorisation in storage services vs. the portal is a fundamental architectural decision that must be documented with rationale and alternatives. While the team has decided on external auth, the ADR must explain WHY this boundary was chosen over portal-based auth.

Add section documenting the authentication architecture decision, alternatives considered, and implications.

Reviewer 2: The (planned) authentication/authorisation on the storage service mentioned in the comments is only meant for the storage service, not for portal, i.e. storage service's `auth` **will not be used** to validate anything on portal.

All the content in the portal is intended to be open to public, so there is no requirement for authentication/authorisation for portal. Would briefing this in the ADR help?

Reviewer 4: @senthil10 
Yes, absolutely brief this in the ADR!
What you've clarified is actually a fundamental architectural decision about system boundaries and responsibilities. The fact that it needed clarification in comments proves it should be explicit in the ADR.

Why This Needs to Be in the ADR:
1. It's a conscious decision to keep Portal 2.0 public-only (not just an oversight)
2. It defines clear boundaries between portal and storage responsibilities
3. It has future implications for feature evolution
4. It affects integration patterns with external data sources

Reviewer 2: Ok, makes sense from that perspective. I was only thinking external public as "users", but we (developers) are also users. 

Thank you for the feedback @aishling-scilifelab and @jhagberg

The current Pathogens Portal architecture has a number of limitations, making it necessary to adopt a more dynamic, flexible and scalable system.

#### Current Limitations

> From a global point of view, we are developing a dynamic site from a static framework:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The motivations for moving from a static web framework include: 
```

> 1. **Too many supporting services:** each service requires dedicated maintainance work, security checks and dependency updates, which increases the workload and disperses the team's efforts. 

Reviewer 5: What services are we talking about?:)

I saw the diagram above, but I think it wouldn't hurt to list them explicitly here or in a separate section as well

Reviewer 3: The ones stated before, but it doesn't hurt to explicitly list them again, thanks for the feedback we will add that

#### Need to redesign the Swedish Pathogens Portal

This ADR proposes a change in architecture that will address the limitations of the Swedish Pathogens Portal by transitioning it from a static website to a dynamic web application.
This will allow developers to concentrate their efforts on serving the infectious disease and pandemic preparedness research communities in Sweden more effectively by maintaining fewer services and adding new, data-centred features and automated workflows.

## Decision

We will transform the Swedish Pathogens Portal from a static website into a **service-oriented, modular web application**, eliminating all supporting services such as Blobserver and Form Manager. This new architecture comprises independently deployable components with clearly defined responsibilities, enabling the Pathogens Portal to expand in terms of both functionality and usage.

![Updating data workflow in current Pathogens Portal](../../figures/0002-portal2.0-architecture.jpg)

*Figure 3: Proposal for new Swedish Pathogens Portal architecture*

> ### Core Technology Stack

Reviewer 5: You are saying that you want to move away from the blob server, but I don't see any mention of Sweden's pathogen data hub or S3. I think it'd be nice to mention it here

Reviewer 3: This will definitely be amended, thanks!

> * **Frontend**: [Next.js](https://nextjs.org/). Responsible for rendering the user interface and interacting with APIs. Supports hybrid rendering (static and dynamic) and offers high performance for modern web delivery.

Reviewer 5: Depending on team's skills and wishes, I can suggest to also consider django + htmx combo.

Reviewer 3: Yes, I totally agree with this suggestion for the sake of simplicity and ease of development, specifically in early stages, but I was outvoted during our team meeting architecture discussions :sweat_smile:

Reviewer 6: how about svelte? Comes without the react bloat and has a quite straight forward syntax?  https://component-party.dev/compare/react-vs-svelte5

Reviewer 3: Svelte would be interesting indeed, but it is client-side only. So we would need to add SvelteKit to the mix with its particularities to run some stuff server-side only.
Given that no one in our team is familiar with this technology, I see it as an "error prone" and "slow to takeoff" option in our team context :)

Reviewer 6: what is the tech-stack in your group?

Reviewer 3: Python comes first with good experience on different frameworks; then JavaScript snippets to create dynamic functionalities in Hugo; then a little of React and PHP experience from one of our member

Reviewer 6: then I would say svelte-kit has a lot lower learning curve then react imo. 

What is the assumed percentage between SSR and static content?

Reviewer 3: I'll suggest it to the team. I would be more willing to learn Svelte than React although I'm not a fan of Svelte syntax weirdness to be honest :sweat_smile:
As a side note, we would have to rewrite all of our existing visualisations that are already in python.

> What is the assumed percentage between SSR and static content?

I would assume something like 40-60 in favour of static.

Reviewer 6: what framework are the python visualizations based on?

Reviewer 3: Plotly, which is available as a JS library as well

* **Backend**: [Django](https://www.djangoproject.com/). Acts as the system’s core, exposing API endpoints via Django REST framework, handling authentication, business logic, and orchestrating integrations with external systems.

* **Database**: [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/). Stores structured content, metadata, configuration data, and supports advanced querying through features like JSONB and full-text search.

* **External Services**: These services will be consumed by the backend via their APIs:

  * **Portal storage solution:** for data uploads and file access
  * **Integrated Data Services (IDS):** for harmonised metadata and research objects
  * **External repositories:** e.g. publication indexes, genomic data archives

### Why This Architecture Approach?

We chose a **service-oriented architecture (SOA)** because it provides:

> * **Loose coupling:** Components can evolve independently, enabling isolated deployments and targeted updates without affecting other parts of the application.

Reviewer 5: While true, please make sure that you have enough people power for development and mainetenance of all components involved:)

And take into account additional difficulty of devepoment of such a service, where you need to run two webservers in parallel in order for them to communicate. This difficulty could be mitigated by htmx though, while adding the dynamicity to the webpages

* **Microservices evolution path:** Current SOA design provides a foundation for future migration to microservices if needed for advanced use cases.
* **API-first approach:** Enables multiple client types (web, mobile, third-party integrations) while maintaining consistent data access patterns.

This approach aligns with modern web development standards preparing the portal for more complex workflows and higher data integration.

### Why These Specific Technologies?

| Component    | Technology | Justification                                                                                                                                                                     |
| ------------ | ---------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Frontend** | Next.js    | Combines static and dynamic rendering, SEO-friendly, React-based, and widely supported. Flexible enough to handle dashboard-style applications and traditional content rendering. |

> | **Backend**  | Django     | Secure, robust, and feature-rich with a built-in admin interface, powerful ORM, and mature REST tooling. Well known to the team and easy to maintain.                             |

Reviewer 5: If you are going Next.JS route, are you going to use pure Django, DRF or Django Ninja?

If it's not decided yet, I can recommend taking a look at django ninja

Reviewer 3: We haven't talked about this yet, but off the top of my head I was indeed only considering Ninja or DRF if we go the full API route. I'll read more in depth about Ninja, thanks for the hint ;)

## Consequences

Adopting a service-oriented architecture (SOA) with decoupled frontend, backend, and database components introduces both **benefits** and **trade-offs**.

### Positive Outcomes

* **Improved modularity:** Each component (frontend, backend, database) can be developed, tested, and deployed independently.
* **Scalable design:** The system can scale horizontally by distributing workload across services, enabling better handling of increased user traffic or data volumes.
* **Future-ready:** The architecture provides a strong foundation for supporting new features such as:

  * Automated content and data update workflows without requiring portal releases
  * AI-powered content summarisation and intelligent data processing
  * Real-time or scheduled data visualisations
  * Editorial workflows with automated publishing pipelines
  * Federated data integration via APIs
  * End-to-end automation from raw data ingestion to visualisation generation

* **Flexible Integrations**: External systems like Portal Storage Solution, IDS, and domain-specific repositories can be plugged in with minimal effort.

> ### Risks & Challenges

Reviewer 5: I'd add that this approach complicates testing and debugging of the whole service as you need to have knowledge in how to run each service individually.

Additionaly I would suggest to rely on api documentation as a communication point between frontend and backend teams

Reviewer 3: This wasn't mentioned during our discussions but it is also true

- **Migration strategy and implementation details:** Specific data migration procedures, timelines, and technical implementation details from current services to Swedish Pathogens Portal 2.0 (SPP 2.0) will be addressed in separate implementation planning documents.

### Core Technology Stack

* **Web Framework**: [Django](https://www.djangoproject.com/). Acts as the system's core, handling server-side rendering via Django templates, admin authentication, business logic, and orchestrating integrations with external systems.

* **Frontend Enhancement**: [htmx](https://htmx.org/). Provides modern dynamic behaviour and interactivity to Django templates without requiring a separate frontend framework. Enables AJAX requests, real-time updates, and dynamic content loading directly from HTML.

* **Database**: [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/). Stores structured content, metadata, configuration data, and supports advanced querying through features like JSONB and full-text search.

> * **External Services**: These services will be consumed by the Django application via their APIs:

Reviewer: Super minor comment: would maybe weaken this point relative to the others (i.e. web framework, DB). The others above it will _definitely_ happen. 

Connection to these external services are future potential plans, especially given that IDS as a system such as this doesn't yet exist. Suggest to update it to something like potential connection to external services and for PSS and IDS to note that they are future plans rather than existing things.
